Ólafur Arnalds (Icelandic pronunciation: [ˈouːlavʏr ˈartnalts]; born 3 November 1986) is an Icelandic multi-instrumentalist and producer from Mosfellsbær, Iceland.[1] He mixes strings and piano with loops and beats, a sound ranging from ambient/electronic to atmospheric pop.[2] He is also the former drummer for hardcore punk and metal bands Fighting Shit, Celestine, and others.

In 2009, Ólafur also formed an experimental techno project, entitled Kiasmos, with Janus Rasmussen from the Icelandic electro-pop band Bloodgroup, announcing his electronic debut album in 2014.

In 2013, Ólafur composed the score for the 2013 ITV series Broadchurch, for which he won the 2014 BAFTA TV Craft Award for Best Original Music.

In 2020, Ólafur was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Original Main Title Theme Music, for his title theme to Apple TV+ series Defending Jacob.

In 2021, he was nominated in two categories at the 64th Annual Grammy Awards.[3] "Loom (feat. Bonobo)" was nominated in the Best Dance/Electronic Recording category and "The Bottom Line" was nominated in the Best Arrangement, Instrumental and Vocals category. Both songs appear on his fifth studio album Some Kind of Peace (2020).

History
1986–2007: Early life and career beginnings
Ólafur's grandmother introduced him to the music of Frédéric Chopin from an early age.[4]

In 2004, Ólafur composed and recorded the intro and two outros for tracks on the album Antigone by German metal band Heaven Shall Burn. On his Facebook page, he described how he got to know them: "I was playing drums in a hardcore band and we were supporting the German metal band Heaven Shall Burn on their Icelandic tour. Being a huge fan, I gave them a demo with some very overly dramatic prog-rock songs I had been making at home – it was not so classic like this but had some badly computerized strings and piano in it. A few months later they contacted me asked if I would write some intros and outros for their new album, but only with the piano/strings elements – So I wrote my first classical pieces. Their album was a big success in Europe and a few months later I got a phone call from a label asking 'would you be interested in making a full album with compositions like this?' I hadn't really considered continuing writing music like this, but said yes."[5]

2007–2008: Eulogy For Evolution and Variations of Static
On 12 October 2007, Ólafur's first solo album Eulogy for Evolution was released. It was followed by the EP Variations of Static in 2008. In the same year, Ólafur toured with Sigur Rós and his second collaboration with Heaven Shall Burn, the album Iconoclast (Part 1: The Final Resistance), was released. He is also reported to have sold out The Barbican Hall in London.[1][6]

2009: Found Songs and Dyad 1909
In April 2009, Ólafur composed and released a track daily for seven days, instantly making each track available within 24 hours from foundsongs.erasedtapes.com. The collection of tracks was entitled Found Songs. The first track was released on 13 April.

In October 2009, the ballet Dyad 1909 premiered with a score composed by Ólafur which was also released as an EP.[6]

Also in 2009, Ólafur formed an experimental techno project, Kiasmos, with Janus Rasmussen from the Icelandic electro-pop band Bloodgroup. They released a joint EP with Ryan Lee West of the EDM project Rival Consoles entitled 65/Milo.

2010–2011: Second studio album and Living Room Songs
In April 2010, Ólafur released a new album entitled ...And They Have Escaped The Weight of Darkness.[7][8] During 2010 Ólafur also went on a well-received Asian Tour organised by China-based promoter Split Works.

On 3 October 2011, Ólafur started another seven-day composition project similar to Found Songs, this one entitled Living Room Songs. Inspired one day by only having a laptop computer available to record the musical ideas he explored using only the video recording feature. Taken by the intimate feeling of the recording, he expanded on the approach for the Living Room Songs project.

Calling on string musician friends, they rehearsed and recorded one song each day for a week in his Reykjavik apartment, releasing the next day for free as streamed videos and mp3 downloads, creating a unique and intimate musical experience. [9] The project was released as an album on 23 December 2011 and a corresponding short film, offered a rare glimpse into Ólafur's creative process and the close-knit musical community he is a part of.[10]

2011 also saw the release of Ólafur's remix of Mr Fogg's track "Keep Your Teeth Sharp" on the EP of the same name.

2012: Another Happy Day, Two Songs For Dance...
In 2012, Ólafur announced a new partnership with the Universal Music label Mercury Classics.[11]

2012 saw four releases from Ólafur; his score for Sam Levinson's film Another Happy Day; an EP entitled Two Songs For Dance; the second EP from his experimental techno project Kiasmos and another EP entitled Stare with German pianist Nils Frahm.

Also in 2012, his song "Allt varð hljótt" was used in the score and the soundtrack for the film The Hunger Games.[12]

"Til enda" was used in a trailer for the 2012 film Looper.[13][14]

2013–2014: For Now I Am Winter and further scores
Ólafur released his third studio album entitled For Now I Am Winter in February 2013. Four tracks featured vocals from Arnór Dan of the Icelandic band Agent Fresco. This was the first time Ólafur incorporated vocals into any of his released work.

More recently, he composed the score and end-credits track for the 2013 ITV series Broadchurch (again featuring the vocals of Arnór Dan[15][16]), for which he won the 2014 BAFTA TV Craft Award for Best Original Music.

Ólafur also composed the score for Ron Krauss' film Gimme Shelter.

For Now I Am Winter was used in the pilot of the 2013 US TV show Masters of Sex.

Ólafur Arnalds has been involved with various other projects and his music appears in many films, television shows and advertisements. His songs have been featured on So You Think You Can Dance in multiple seasons.[17] He also spoke at length on the subject of fan-submitted art in the 2011 documentary film Press Pause Play.[18][19]

In 2014 Ólafur announced his electronic debut album in collaboration with Janus Rasmussen under his project Kiasmos.

2015: The Chopin Project and further projects
In 2015 Ólafur collaborated with German-Japanese pianist Alice Sara Ott on The Chopin Project, which was a release to introduce an exciting new take on the music of Frédéric Chopin. Arnalds chose a program of Chopin works to create an emotional arc throughout the album and then composed linking sections for string quintet, piano, and synthesizer based on the atmosphere and motifs of those pieces.[20]

The Chopin Project began as a dedication to Ólafur's grandmother, in some respects. Out of respect for her, a younger, metal-loving Ólafur would sit with her to listen to Chopin's work whenever they had visited one another. At her deathbed, Ólafur said “she was just lying there, old and sick, but very happy and proud. And I sat with her and we listened to a Chopin sonata. Then I kissed her goodbye and left. She passed away a few hours later.”[21]

In 2015, Ólafur's collaborations with Nils Frahm, Life Story Love and Glory (a completely improvised recording) and Loon, were collected on a double CD entitled Collaborative Works along with 2012's Stare and a live improvisational film entitled Trance Frendz - An evening with Ólafur Arnalds and Nils Frahm.[22] 2015 also saw the full release of his work on Broadchurch.

2016: Island Songs
In June 2016 Ólafur announced his Island Songs[23] project, which would involve him working with director Baldvin Z and travelling to seven different locations in Iceland over seven weeks, collaborating with seven different artists. Each week the audio and video for each track would be released, culminating in the final track, "Doria", being released on 8 August 2016.

List of tracks with collaborators:

"Árbakkinn" (ft. Einar Georg)
"1995" (ft. Dagný Arnalds)
"Raddir" (ft. South Iceland Chamber Choir)
"Öldurót" (ft. Atli Örvarsson & SinfoniaNord)
"Dalur" (ft. Brasstríó Mosfellsdals)
"Particles" (ft. Nanna Bryndís from Of Monsters and Men)
"Doria"
"Particles" ft. Nanna Bryndís from Of Monsters and Men was premiered on Zane Lowe's Beats 1 show on 1 August 2016, making it the first classical track featured on that station.

In 2016, Ólafur and Quarashi frontman Sölvi Blöndal founded the record label Alda Music, which was acquired by INgrooves in January 2022. Alda owned the rights to nearly 80 percent of all music released in Iceland.[24]

2018: re:member

With Stratus Pianos at Iceland Airwaves, 2018
Ólafur's fourth official solo album, Re:member was released in August 2018. The album featured his new musical system called Stratus. The Stratus Pianos are two self-playing, semi-generative player pianos which are triggered by a central piano played by Arnalds. The custom-built software was born out of two years of work by the composer and audio developer, Halldor Eldjarn. As Arnalds plays a note on the piano, two different notes are generated by Stratus, creating unexpected harmonies and surprising melodic sequences.

The algorithms generated from Stratus were also used to create the album artwork. In an interview with Sound of Boston, Arnalds explains that the artist, Torsten Posselt from FELD studios, used the Stratus software as a starting point and made his own software that translated the same MIDI signals used for the music. Each dot corresponds to a piano note in the title track: 88 fields correspond to 88 notes; the thicker the dot, the higher the frequency of that note being played.[25]

He composed the main theme for the Apple TV+ mini series Defending Jacob (miniseries).

2020: some kind of peace
His fifth studio album, Some Kind of Peace, was released on 6 November 2020. The album features guest appearances from Bonobo, Josin, and JFDR. "Loom (feat. Bonobo)" and "The Bottom Line" were nominated for Grammy Awards.

2023: OPIA Community
In October 2023, Ólafur officially launched the OPIA Community project, which is described as a "travelling festival series, a record label and a community hub made up of creators, thinkers, art lovers and everything in-between."[26] The project had been in preparation since 2019, however was delayed by the COVID-19 pandemic.

On 18 October 2023, Ólafur hosted the official OPIA Community launch event titled 'OPIA Night' at Silent Green in Berlin, Germany. The event featured several artists who Ólafur met online during the pandemic and have since been signed to the OPIA Community record label, including JFDR and Sofi Paez.

Personal life
Ólafur's cousin Ólöf Arnalds is also a well-known singer-songwriter.

Ólafur is a vegetarian.[27]

Ólafur's favourite classical composers are Frédéric Chopin, David Lang, Shostakovich and Arvo Pärt.[4]

Ólafur lives in Iceland but also has a home in Indonesia.[28]

Notable awards and nominations
Awards
BAFTA awards (2014), Best Original Music, for Broadchurch
Televisual Bulldog Awards (2014), Best Music, for Broadchurch
The Edda Icelandic Film Awards (2015), Best music, for Vonarstræti
Icelandic Music Awards (2021), Best Film and TV Score, for Defending Jacob
Notable nominations
Emmy Awards (2020), Outstanding Original Main Title Theme Music, for Defending Jacob
Grammy Awards (2022), Best Arrangement, Instruments and Vocals, for "The Bottom Line"
Grammy Awards (2022), Best Dance/Electronic Recording, for "Loom (feat. Bonobo)"
Discography
Albums
Eulogy for Evolution (2007)
...And They Have Escaped the Weight of Darkness (2010)
For Now I Am Winter (2013)
Island Songs (2016)
re:member (2018)
some kind of peace (2020)[29]
Extended plays
Variations of Static - EP (2008)
Only the Winds - EP (2013)
The Invisible EP - EP (2021)
Singles
"Two Songs for Dance" (2012)
"Kinesthesis I" (2016)
"RGB" (2016)
"Zeit" (2021) (rework for Rammstein)
"Saudade" (2021)
Collections
Found Songs (2009)
Living Room Songs (2011)
Island Songs (2016)
Soundtracks
Dyad 1909 (2009)
Blinky TM (2010)
Jitters (2010)
Another Happy Day (2012)
Gimme Shelter (2013)
Vonarstræti/Life in a Fishbowl (2014)
The Invisible Front (2014)
Broadchurch (2015)
"Not Alone" - Single (2015) from Broadchurch
Defending Jacob (2020)
Surface (2022)
Moonhaven (2022)
Deep rising (2023)
Collaborations
A Hundred Reasons - Single (2010) with Haukur Heiðar Hauksson (lead singer of Dikta)
Stare - EP (2012) with Nils Frahm
The Chopin Project - LP (2015) with Alice Sara Ott
So Far - Single (2015) with Arnór Dan
Life Story / Love and Glory - Single (2015) with Nils Frahm
Loon - EP (2015) with Nils Frahm
Trance Frendz - LP (2016) with Nils Frahm
Say My Name - Single (2016) with Arnór Dan
Unfold - Single (2018) with Sohn
Patience - Single (2019) with Rhye
Back To The Sky - Single (2022) with JFDR
Loom - Single (2022) with Bonobo
Oceans - Single (2020) with RY X
Colorblind - Single (2022) with RY X
Light of Day - Single (2022) with Odesza

Ólafur Arnalds has steadily built a reputation as a unique artist and composer, purveying a neo-classical style with an array of influences which range from electronica to minimalism. He draws on a variety of sources and inspiration whilst maintaining his own individual sound, mixing strings and piano with loops and edgy beats to create an immersive, bold and tantalizing crossover between ambient, electronic and pop.

Originally from Mosfellsbær, a small-town suburb of Reykjavik, Ólafur released his debut album ‘Eulogy for Evolution’ in 2007 and has since released a further four albums, all of which have received critical acclaim. Alongside his work as a recording artist, Ólafur has composed music for a variety of film and television projects.

Ólafur’s scores include Anna, part of the Leipzig Homicide series co-scored with Snorri Hallgrímsson, the Apple TV+ series Surface, sci-fi series Moonhaven, the title theme for Apple TV+’s Defending Jacob, for which he received an Emmy nomination for ‘Outstanding Original Main Title Theme Music’ and Electric Dreams for Channel 4, a sci-fi anthology series of ten epic, ambitious standalone episodes inspired by Philip K. Dick’s renowned short stories.

Ólafur was commissioned to compose the score for the highly acclaimed and wildly popular ITV/Kudos series, Broadchurch (Series 1-3) starring Olivia Colman and David Tennant for which he won the BAFTA Craft Award for ‘Best Original Television Music’ in 2014 and was nominated again in 2016.

Ólafur’s songs have featured on The Hunger Games score, multiple seasons of So You Think You Can Dance, the trailer for the 2012 film Looper and Showtime’s Masters Of Sex.


Career highlights:

Ólafur Arnalds is one of Iceland’s foremost musicians and composers. His work, both as a recording artist and film composer, have been met with high critical acclaim worldwide and earned him a BAFTA award win for Best Original Music and nominations for both Grammy and Emmy Awards.

Over the course of his career as a recording artist he has released five full length albums along with dozens of EPs, collaborations and various projects — including two films, Island Songs (2017) and When We Are Born (2021). As a neo-classical composer his often unorthodox live shows have sold out many of the most prestigious live venues in the world, including The Royal Albert Hall, Sydney Opera Hall, Elbphilharmonie, and The Warfield. His latest album, some kind of peace (2020), earned him two Grammy nominations, charted in the UK’s Top 40 and was named album of the year by NPR’s Bob Boilen.

Notable Awards:

BAFTA awards (2014), Best Original Music, for Broadchurch

Television Bulldog Awards (2014), Best Music, for Broadchurch

The Edda Icelandic Film Awards (2015), Best music, for Vonarstræti

Icelandic Music Award (2021), Best Film and TV Score, for Defending Jacob

Notable Nominations:

Emmy Awards (2020), Outstanding Original Main Title Theme Music, for Defending Jacob

Grammy Awards (2022), Best Arrangement, Instruments and Vocals, for The Bottom Line

Grammy Awards (2022), Best Dance/Electronic Recording, for Loom (feat. Bonobo)

Ólafur Arnalds is one of Iceland’s foremost musicians and composers. His work, both as a recording artist and film composer, have been met with high critical acclaim worldwide and earned him a BAFTA award win for Best Original Music and nominations for both Grammy and Emmy Awards.

Over the course of his career as a recording artist he has released five full length albums along with dozens of EPs, collaborations and various projects — including two films, Island Songs (2017) and When We Are Born (2021). Ólafur's live shows are often quite unorthodox for a neo-classical composer and have sold out many of the most prestigious live venues in the world, including The Royal Albert Hall, Sydney Opera Hall, Elbphilharmonie, and The Warfield. His latest album, some kind of peace (2020), earned him two Grammy nominations, charted in the UK’s Top 40 and was named album of the year by NPR’s Bob Boilen.

In 2023, Ólafur Arnalds announced the launch of OPIA Community, a new multidisciplinary initiative focused on strengthening the scene where modern classical music meets electronic music. Born out of Ólafur's desire to create an environment that encourages experimentation and collaboration, OPIA was originally launched in 2019 as a one-day festival. The first edition was a sold-out takeover at the Southbank Centre in London. This was followed in 2023 by the rebirth of OPIA as a three-part venture: A traveling festival, a record label and a hub for collaborative projects. This was followed by a sold-out launch event at Berlin's Silent Green in October 2023. Since 2024, Decca Records has acted as the exclusive partner and distributor for the label wing of OPIA, while Wise Music handles the publishing side for OPIA label artists. This was followed by a second edition of the OPIA Festival in Utrecht's Tivoli-Vredenburg.

Awards:
BAFTA awards (2014), Best Original Music, for Broadchurch
Television Bulldog Awards (2014), Best Music, for Broadchurch
The Edda Icelandic Film Awards (2015), Best music, for Vonarstræti
Icelandic Music Award (2021), Best Film and TV Score, for Defending Jacob

Notable Nominations:
Emmy Awards (2020), Outstanding Original Main Title Theme Music, for Defending Jacob
Grammy Awards (2022), Best Arrangement, Instruments and Vocals, for The Bottom Line
Grammy Awards (2022), Best Dance/Electronic Recording, for Loom
Grammy Awards (2024), Best New Age, ambient or Chant album)


Award-winning artist, composer and producer Ólafur Arnalds is back on the road with brand new material. After a triumphant return to the stage in 2018, the ‘re:act’ tour represents Ólafur’s final set of shows after nearly three years of touring.

Ólafur’s performances continue to captivate audiences across the globe as he invites them to join him on a new journey where he presents his most personal and raw music to date — a counterpoint to the exuberant energy of his latest album ‘re:member’.
His haunting and often intensely emotional shows are an exercise in intimacy, a space for the artist and audience to share their vulnerability through music.

Ólafur and his team of fellow craftsmen and musicians put on a spellbinding performance that brings together past, present and new material. The ‘re:act’ tour features his signature string quartet, a live percussionist and Ólafur’s arsenal of pianos and synthesizers. His groundbreaking, self-playing Stratus pianos will be along for the ride — creating unexpected harmonies and surprising melodic sequences that make every performance unique.

His tour in support of 2018’s studio album ‘re:member’ was met with high critical acclaim, including sold-out arenas and renowned concert halls all over the world. With more than 150 concerts Ólafur captivated hundreds of thousands of fans and created momentous events at iconic venues such as the Royal Albert Hall, Elbphilharmonie, Sydney Opera House and premiered the first edition of his very own genre-bending music festival OPIA.

As Ólafur wraps up this part of his artistic life he will pour everything he has into these last few shows, before heading back into his creative cocoon in search of his next adventure.

celandic composer, multi-instrumentalist, and producer Ólafur Arnalds earned a reputation in the late 2000s for blending luminous neo-classical works with subtle elements of post-rock, pop, and electronic music, recording a series of highly regarded releases for the Erased Tapes label, including 2007's Eulogy for Evolution and ...And They Have Escaped the Weight of Darkness. In addition to forming the experimental techno duo Kiasmos with Faroese-Icelandic minimalist Janus Rasmussen, he also branched out into film and television soundtracks, earning acclaim for his scores to the films Another Happy Day and Gimme Shelter as well as the BBC series Broadchurch. Meanwhile, Arnalds continued to explore the classical world on collaborative projects like 2014's The Chopin Project with cellist Alice Sara Ott and an ongoing set of releases with German composer Nils Frahm. He returned to solo work in 2018 with the experimental release re:member. He issued the intimate, Grammy-nominated some kind of peace in 2020, followed two years later by the soundtrack for the psychological thriller TV miniseries Surface.

Antigone
Having begun his music career as the drummer for a series of Icelandic metal bands, Arnalds' entry into the neo-classical field was somewhat accidental. After the German band Heaven Shall Burn heard some solo demo material, they asked him to provide piano-and-string pieces for their 2004 album Antigone. Robert Raths, founder of the newly formed Erased Tapes label, heard the record and was impressed with Arnalds' contributions, and the label contacted the composer about recording a full album of material in that vein. The life-cycle concept album Eulogy for Evolution, released in 2007, was the result, with Arnalds -- primarily on piano -- supported by a string quartet. A trio of EPs followed in 2008 and 2009. Also in 2009, Arnalds formed the experimental techno duo Kiasmos with Janus Rasmussen of Bloodgroup. Kiasmos' first release was a split EP with Erased Tapes labelmate Rival Consoles.

Stare
In 2010, Arnalds provided the scores for the 13-minute short Blinky TM and the feature-length Órói (Jitters), and he also released ...And They Have Escaped the Weight of Darkness, his second proper album. His score for Sam Levinson's Another Happy Day (2011) greatly increased his profile, as he continued to release works like Stare (2012) -- a collaborative EP with Nils Frahm -- and Kiasmos' Thrown EP. He then began a partnership with Mercury Classics, which issued For Now I Am Winter (2013), his first album to include vocals. Later that year, Arnalds scored the BBC television series Broadchurch, which produced its own soundtrack. A digital download of the composer's score for Ronald Krauss' film Gimme Shelter was released in February 2014, followed by a physical release in April.

Swept
Kiasmos issued their self-titled debut album in October 2014. Two accompanying EPs, Swept and Looped, followed in 2015. Also that year, Arnalds collaborated with pianist Alice Sara Ott for The Chopin Project on Mercury Classics. He continued collaborating with Frahm on Erased Tapes, which issued the EPs Loon and Life Story/Love and Glory as well as the full-length Trance Frendz. All of these releases, as well as 2012 EP Stare, were compiled as the double-CD Collaborative Works. In 2016, Arnalds issued a volume of the LateNightTales mix series. The following year saw the release of the soundtrack album Broadchurch: The Final Chapter, which consisted of his score for the BBC series' last season.

The full-length re:member arrived in 2018 and featured unique custom-built software called Stratus, which incorporated two semi-generative player pianos triggered by Arnalds' own live piano playing. It debuted at number eight on Billboard's Top Heatseekers chart. The composer received an Emmy nomination for his theme to the Apple TV+ miniseries Defending Jacob in 2020. With featured spots by British musician Bonobo (the Grammy-nominated "Loom"), Icelandic singer JFDR, and German singer/songwriter Josin, the intimate solo set some kind of peace followed on Mercury KX that November. In 2022, Arnalds composed the soundtrack for the psychological thriller miniseries Surface.

Related Artists
Similar To:
Jóhann Jóhannsson
Max Richter
Peter Broderick
Viktor Orri Árnason
Yann Tiersen
Young Scamels
A Winged Victory for the Sullen
Abel Korzeniowski
Dustin O'Halloran
Fiona Brice
James Heather
Jean-Michel Blais
Jónsi & Alex
Julia Kent
Library Tapes
Lubomyr Melnyk
Rachel Grimes
Sylvain Chauveau
William Doyle
Artem Ramsay
Balmorhea
Goldmund
Luke Howard
Michael Price
Örvar Smárason
Port Blue
Tomas Nordmark
Valgeir Sigurðsson
Violeta Vicci
Anoice
Árstíðir
Bill Ryder-Jones
Bruno Bavota
Douglas Dare
Efterklang
Erland Cooper
Gabríel Ólafs
Kaada/Patton
Lambert
Nanna
Olan Mill
Qasim Naqvi
Quinquis
Slow Meadow
Tóti Guðnason
Influenced By
Claude Debussy
Múm
Sigur Rós
Collaborated With:
Nils Frahm



Moods and Themes:
Artist Moods
Intimate
Meditative
Reflective
Delicate
Dreamy
Elegant
Ethereal
Gentle
Light
Plaintive
Soft/Quiet
Soothing
Warm
Cerebral
Poignant
Relaxed
Somber
Sparkling
Wistful
Yearning
Calm/Peaceful
Lively
Pulsing
Vulnerable
Artist Themes
Comfort
Reflection
Dreaming
Solitude